Data Converter updates (#1932)
temporalio/documentation: docs-src/concepts/what-is-a-custom-data-converter.md

---
id: what-is-a-custom-data-converter
title: What is a custom Data Converter?
sidebar_label: Custom Data Converter
description: A custom Data Converter is an implementation of the Data Converter with custom logic for payload conversion and payload encryption.

tags:
  - term
  - explanation
---

> A custom Data Converter is an implementation of the [Data Converter](/concepts/what-is-a-data-converter) with custom logic for payload conversion and payload encryption.

Reviewer: This will make readers implement `DataConvderter` interface, which they should pretty much never do. We need to reformulate it to avoid this effect. I don't think we need even to give such a "definition" here of "What is a custom Data Converter?"
"User may customize data conversation logic by specifying own PayloadConverts and PayloadCodecs".
Or "A custom Data Converter is a customization of default Data Conversion logic with own PayloadConverts and PayloadCodecs" if we have to write definitions.

Author: Updated to:
`A custom Data Converter implements custom logic for payload conversion or payload encryption to customize the default [Data Converter](/concepts/what-is-a-data-converter).`

You can create a custom Data Converter to alter formats (for example using [MessagePack](https://msgpack.org/) instead of JSON) or add compression and encryption.

You can customize the default Data Converter behavior in two ways:

> - To convert custom types to payloads and back, use a custom `PayloadConverter` and set it to alter the default Data Converter.

Reviewer: Reader here may not understand what "payloads" we are talking about. This work can mean anything. I would reframe this into: 
PayloadConverter is serialization. Objects <-> bytes.
PayloadCodec is encoding. bytes <-> bytes

> - To use custom encryption and/or compression logic, create a custom `PayloadCodec` with your encryption/compression logic in the `encode` function, and your decryption/decompression logic in your `decode` function.

Reviewer: Need a language-specific info, for example for Java to work with `PayloadCodec` user needs CodecDataConverter

Author: Added links to the language specific sections.

Custom Data Converters are not applied to all data:

> - Search Attributes are always encoded with JSON.

Reviewer: I would just say that "Search Attributes are simple values and are persisted unencoded". Users don't benefit from more details here I think.

> - Headers are not encoded by the SDK (the one exception will be—when implemented—the SDK [running OTel baggage through custom Codecs](https://github.com/temporalio/sdk-typescript/issues/514)).

Reviewer: What kinds of Headers?
gRPC or Temporal?
Temporal Headers are encoded. And OTEL baggage is already encoded with converters, at least in JavaSDK.
gRPC headers are non-encoded. But it's a pretty trivial statement and they don't transfer any user data. There is no way to influence a gRPC header that SDK/Server creates from a Workflow or Activity code for example. So there is no user data.

> A custom Data Converter can have thee following three components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A customized Data Converter can have the following three components:
```

tags:
  - term
  - explanation
---

A custom Data Converter uses custom logic for payload conversion or payload encryption to customize the default [Data Converter](/concepts/what-is-a-data-converter).

You can create a custom Data Converter to alter formats (for example, using [MessagePack](https://msgpack.org/) instead of JSON) or add compression and encryption.

You can customize the default Data Converter behavior in two ways:

- A Payload Converter serializes data, converting objects to bytes and back.
  To convert custom objects or data types to payloads and back, use a custom `PayloadConverter` and set it to alter the default Data Converter.
- A Payload Codec encodes and decodes data, with bytes-to-bytes conversion.
  To use custom encryption and/or compression logic, create a custom `PayloadCodec` with your encryption/compression logic in the `encode` function, and your decryption/decompression logic in your `decode` function.

Custom Data Converters are not applied to all data:

- Search Attributes are simple values and are persisted unencoded.

> - Headers are not encoded by the SDK. (The one exception—when implemented—will be the SDK [running OTel baggage through custom codecs](https://github.com/temporalio/sdk-typescript/issues/514).)

Author: I think Dmitry brought this up also; I'm going to remove this part out for now.
